README.md, before:

# grunt-mysqldump

[![Version npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/grunt-mysqldump.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-mysqldump)
[![Downloads npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/grunt-mysqldump.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-mysqldump)
[![MIT license](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/grunt-mysqldump.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Grunt-mysqldump is a Grunt plugin for dumping and archiving MySQL databases. It supports exporting and archiving multiple databases in a single operation, runs asynchronously, and is extremely fast. Outputs export and compression information as each operation completes. Tested on moderate to large size databases without any problems.

## Installation

Install the plugin with this command:

```shell
npm install grunt-mysqldump --save-dev
```

Enable the plugin inside your Gruntfile:

```js
grunt.loadNpmTasks('grunt-mysqldump');
```

To run the task, issue the following command:

```sh
grunt mysqldump
```

## Configuration

In your project's Gruntfile, add a section named `mysqldump` to the data object passed into `grunt.initConfig()`.

```js
db: grunt.file.readJSON('config/database.json'),    
```

```js  
mysqldump: {
  dist: {
    user: '<%= db.local.user %>',
    pass: '<%= db.local.pass %>',
    host: '<%= db.local.host %>',
    port: '<%= db.local.port %>',
    dest: 'exports/',
    options: {
      compress: 'gzip'
    },
    databases: [
      'sakila',
      'world',
      'employees'
    ],
  },
},
```

Example config/database.json

```json
{
  "local": {
    "username": "root",
    "password": "password",
    "hostname": "127.0.0.1",
    "port": "3306"
  }
}
```

### Wildcard Usage

Dump all your databases by using an asterisk aka wildcard. 

> Note: When using the wildcard flag you have the option to ignore specific databases by creating a forget array.

```js 
mysqldump: {
  dist: {
    user: '<%= db.local.user %>',
    pass: '<%= db.local.pass %>',
    host: '<%= db.local.host %>',
    port: '<%= db.local.port %>',
    dest: 'backups/',
    options: {
      compress: true,
      algorithm: 'zip',
      level: 5,
      data_only: true
    },
    databases: [
      '*'
    ],
    forget: [
      'information_schema',
      'performance_schema',
      'phpmyadmin',
      'mysql',
      'sakila',
      'world'
    ],
  },
},
```

## Configuration Parameters

This section provides details about the configuration parameters that you can set for the `grunt-mysqldump` task.

### `user`
This parameter specifies the username for the MySQL database connection. 

### `pass`
This parameter specifies the password associated with the username for the MySQL database connection.

### `host`
This parameter specifies the hostname or IP address of the machine where the MySQL server is running.

### `port`
This parameter specifies the port number on which the MySQL server is listening for connections. The default MySQL port number is `3306`.

### `dest`
This parameter specifies the destination directory where the database dump files will be written. Please ensure that this directory has the necessary write permissions.

### `compress`

Set to false for no compression. Will only perform a mysqldump of the target database files.

- Type: `Boolean`
- Default: `false`
- Required: `false`

### `algorithm`

Currently supports `gzip`, `deflate`, `deflateRaw`, `tar`, `tgz` and `zip`.

- Type: `String`
- Default: `zip`
- Required: `false`

### `level`
Sets the `zlib` compression level. This is an integer in the range of 0 to 9. 

- Type: `Integer`
- Default: `8`
- Required: `false`

Here's what each level means:

| Level | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| **0** | No compression |
| **1** | Best speed |
| **2-8** | A compromise between speed and compression |
| **9** | Best compression |

### `data_only`

Suppress the `CREATE TABLE` statements from the output.

- Type: `Boolean`
- Default: `false`
- Required: `false`

### `databases`

An array of databases to export. 
- Type: `Array`

### `forget`

An array of databases to ignore when using a `databases` wildcard.

- Type: `Array`

## 📚 Libraries Used

This project wouldn't be possible without these wonderful libraries:

- **shelljs**: Provides portable Unix shell commands for Node.js. It's our go-to library for handling shell commands.

- **node-archiver**: A powerful library that provides a streaming interface for archive generation. It's what we use to create the database dump archives.

- **bytes.js**: This library helps us parse byte strings in Node.js. It's a small but crucial part of our toolkit.

- **mysql**: A pure Node.js JavaScript client implementing the MySQL protocol. It's the backbone of our MySQL operations.

We're grateful to the developers and contributors of these libraries. 🙏

## License

The MIT License (MIT). See [License File](LICENSE) for more information.
```

Commit message:

feat: update package.json for version 1.0.0 and improve dependencies
refactor: rewrite mysqldump.js to use async/await and mysql2/promise

chore: add CI workflow for testing on multiple Node.js versions

chore: add ESLint configuration for TypeScript support

chore: add TypeScript configuration for task compilation

README.md, after:

# grunt-mysqldump

[![Version npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/v/grunt-mysqldump.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-mysqldump)
[![Downloads npm](https://img.shields.io/npm/dt/grunt-mysqldump.svg)](https://www.npmjs.com/package/grunt-mysqldump)
[![MIT license](https://img.shields.io/npm/l/grunt-mysqldump.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)

Grunt-mysqldump is a Grunt plugin for dumping and archiving MySQL databases. It supports exporting and archiving multiple databases in a single operation, runs asynchronously, and is extremely fast. Outputs export and compression information as each operation completes. Tested on moderate to large size databases without any problems.

## Requirements

- Node.js >= 18
- Grunt >= 1.0.0
- `mysqldump` CLI available on your system PATH

## Installation

Install the plugin with this command:

```shell
npm install grunt-mysqldump --save-dev
```

Enable the plugin inside your Gruntfile:

```js
grunt.loadNpmTasks('grunt-mysqldump');
```

To run the task, issue the following command:

```sh
grunt mysqldump
```

## Configuration

In your project's Gruntfile, add a section named `mysqldump` to the data object passed into `grunt.initConfig()`.

```js
db: grunt.file.readJSON('config/database.json'),
```

```js
mysqldump: {
  dist: {
    user: '<%= db.local.user %>',
    pass: '<%= db.local.pass %>',
    host: '<%= db.local.host %>',
    port: '<%= db.local.port %>',
    dest: 'exports/',
    options: {
      compress: 'gzip'
    },
    databases: [
      'sakila',
      'world',
      'employees'
    ],
  },
},
```

Example config/database.json

```json
{
  "local": {
    "username": "root",
    "password": "password",
    "hostname": "127.0.0.1",
    "port": "3306"
  }
}
```

### Wildcard Usage

Dump all your databases by using an asterisk aka wildcard.

> Note: When using the wildcard flag you have the option to ignore specific databases by creating a forget array.

```js
mysqldump: {
  dist: {
    user: '<%= db.local.user %>',
    pass: '<%= db.local.pass %>',
    host: '<%= db.local.host %>',
    port: '<%= db.local.port %>',
    dest: 'backups/',
    options: {
      compress: true,
      algorithm: 'zip',
      level: 5,
      data_only: true
    },
    databases: [
      '*'
    ],
    forget: [
      'information_schema',
      'performance_schema',
      'phpmyadmin',
      'mysql',
      'sakila',
      'world'
    ],
  },
},
```

## Configuration Parameters

This section provides details about the configuration parameters that you can set for the `grunt-mysqldump` task.

### `user`
This parameter specifies the username for the MySQL database connection.

### `pass`
This parameter specifies the password associated with the username for the MySQL database connection.

### `host`
This parameter specifies the hostname or IP address of the machine where the MySQL server is running.

### `port`
This parameter specifies the port number on which the MySQL server is listening for connections. The default MySQL port number is `3306`.

### `dest`
This parameter specifies the destination directory where the database dump files will be written. Please ensure that this directory has the necessary write permissions.

### `compress`

Set to false for no compression. Will only perform a mysqldump of the target database files.

- Type: `Boolean`
- Default: `false`
- Required: `false`

### `algorithm`

Currently supports `gzip`, `deflate`, `deflateRaw`, `tar`, `tgz` and `zip`.

- Type: `String`
- Default: `zip`
- Required: `false`

### `level`
Sets the `zlib` compression level. This is an integer in the range of 0 to 9.

- Type: `Integer`
- Default: `8`
- Required: `false`

Here's what each level means:

| Level | Description |
|-------|-------------|
| **0** | No compression |
| **1** | Best speed |
| **2-8** | A compromise between speed and compression |
| **9** | Best compression |

### `data_only`

Suppress the `CREATE TABLE` statements from the output.

- Type: `Boolean`
- Default: `false`
- Required: `false`

### `databases`

An array of databases to export.
- Type: `Array`

### `forget`

An array of databases to ignore when using a `databases` wildcard.

- Type: `Array`

## Development

The source is written in TypeScript under `src/tasks/`. Compiled output goes to `tasks/`.

```sh
npm install
npm run build    # compile TypeScript
npm run lint     # run ESLint
```

## Libraries Used

- **[mysql2](https://github.com/sidorares/node-mysql2)** — MySQL client for Node.js with Promise support. Used for wildcard database discovery.

- **[archiver](https://github.com/archiverjs/node-archiver)** — Streaming archive generation (zip, tar, tgz).

- **[bytes](https://github.com/visionmedia/bytes.js)** — Byte string parsing for human-readable file sizes.

## License

The MIT License (MIT). See [License File](LICENSE) for more information.
